This is an AI generated transcript of the video ["Happy Hour: Compassion as Natural as the Air We Breathe"](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=oiBM9nIvorI). It may contain inaccuracies.

***

Hello friends, hello and welcome to happy hour. My name is Nikki, and I'm in Mountain View, California, on Ohlone land[^1], welcoming you to happy hour. As always, we start by saying hello, welcoming each other and welcoming ourselves.

The Sangha[^2] has assembled. We are here from lots of different places in the world.

Some of you might know that this week I'm subbing for Gil, and the theme I'm exploring is compassion. It is a theme that we've explored, of course, a lot in happy hour. I wanted to explore and invite us to practice with very subtle, very gentle, quiet compassion this evening with the breath. Just very subtle, let it be in the background, suffusing our breath, suffusing this moment. We'll have a pretty quiet guided meditation tonight to really settle into the space with silence, with kindness, with warmth, and holding whatever challenges there might be with compassion and kindness. So that's the plan. Let's practice together.

Arriving. Arriving in this moment in time, in our bodies, and on the cushion or the chair. Relaxing, softening the body. However the body is in this moment, inviting the body to soften, to relax. Not pushing away any discomfort, but softening around it, softening into it. And letting the breath be supportive in this softening.

Lend awareness and greet each breath in the body. The entirety of the in-breath, the entirety of the out-breath. Really support us to land, especially if we're feeling restless or distracted. Connecting with the entirety of the breath, not as a chore, not as a grim duty, but with care, with kindness towards ourselves.

Can we allow, can we invite kindness to be breathed in with each breath? Breathed in and breathed out. Breathing in kindness, breathing out kindness. Breathing in kindness towards this body, breathing out kindness, goodwill, friendliness around this body. Not so much as an effortful breathing in, but letting it be breathed. Imagining that the air around you is infused with kindness, so there is no other way than to breathe in goodwill, kindness, friendliness into this heart, into this body, to these lungs, nourishing ourselves with goodwill. Letting goodwill find its way to every cell of this body. It's already available. It's no work, it's already here. It's also breathed out. It's so natural, as natural as the breath itself, as breathing itself—automatic.

Maybe you experiment with greeting the kindness that's being breathed in with a smile. Or maybe a smile shows up because it's quite lovely to be breathing in kindness and goodwill into the body and feeling nourished by it. There's a natural gladness that arises.

Realizing that the conditions are like this right now, whatever the conditions are in the body, in your mind, in your heart, that it is like this right now. And if there are any challenges present right now in the physical space or emotional space, letting this kindness that you breathe in, the goodwill, the friendliness, meet and hold great space around whatever challenge there might be. When difficulty is met with kindness, with goodwill, this is compassion. Meeting difficulty, pain—physical pain, emotional challenges—with kindness, with gentleness, with goodwill, is compassion for ourselves.

So let kindness be breathed in again. Let goodwill continue to be breathed in, breathed out, and meeting whatever is necessary in this moment. Don't make breathing in and out kindness into a hyperventilation or too much work. Let it be natural. It's just in the air around you. It's very subtle. You're sitting in it. It's infusing your body, your heart. It's kindness holding whatever might be challenging.

Maybe you find that your body feels more relaxed or safer, more at ease. Maybe something releases, some holding releases in the heart or in the body as you sit in this air imbued with goodwill, kindness, gentleness, as it's breathed in and out naturally.

Nowhere to go, nothing to do. It's not a doing. This invitation is a non-doing. It's a natural way of being. Let it be as natural as the breath happening on its own. An infusion of goodwill, kindness, meeting whatever is arising with metta[^3], and if it's a challenge, it becomes compassion.

As we bring this meditation to a close, letting there be kindness, gentle appreciation for having showed up as best as you were able to in this moment. No need for judgment or comparison, and if any arise, let them be held in this air, in the space of kindness. Trusting we are planting seeds of goodness and kindness to support ourselves, support our loved ones, and all beings whose lives we touch directly and indirectly. May all beings everywhere be well, be free, including ourselves.

Thank you, friends. Thank you for your practice.

I love this gentle practice. It's like sitting in a warm bath, breathing in air of kindness. The whole body can relax into it. There's not so much doing, and I certainly feel happier and more gentle, and also more awake, more alert.

So what we did was basically, I invited you to work with kindness, not so much as a doing, but as natural as breathing. That kindness being breathed in, kindness being breathed out towards the body, towards others, internally and externally, though our focus really was ourselves. And then I asked you, if there are any challenges in the body or in the mind, let this kindness, this goodwill, meet the difficulty, the pain. And as many of you might already know, when kindness, when metta, meets and holds suffering and pain, that is the expression of compassion. Compassion is metta plus suffering. So that it becomes expressed as karuna[^4], as compassion. So we're playing around with that in this session in a very gentle, non-doing way, just letting it be, letting the body rest in it, and letting kindness and goodwill infuse the body.

As always, after we practice on the cushion on our own with our eyes closed, we have an opportunity to bring the practice into a relational field. Can we now enter a space of kindness towards ourselves and towards a couple of other practitioners with this gentle air of kindness, as if there is kindness in the Zoom room, in the bits and bytes, as we breathe together? Showing up with this kindness for ourselves in this relational field.

The invitation is, if you want to share anything about how this practice was for you, if there were any aha moments or challenges, you are welcome to. You could also just say "pass" and hold compassionate, kind presence for yourself and others. The three of you in the room can sit together in silence the whole time, or until somebody wants to share something. Let yourself speak from the heart. Let it be a council where you speak from the heart. You don't ask questions, just share from your own heart, and the next person, if they want, they do that, and then the next person. We'll come back to you and go around and round. Take care of yourselves, take care of each other. No directing, just showing up either with silence, with kindness, or with words, whatever you'd like to share.

---
*After breakout rooms, the session continues with reflections.*

**Malaya:** Thank you so much. I feel like this meditation really helps me because I've been experiencing some physical health problems lately where I have a lot of discomfort and pain. And then when I was meditating, I thought of a flower, and I was like, "Oh, I am also a flower." It sounds strange, but I was like, "I am also a flower." And I was like, "Well, I'm a flower because I have my own beauty, and I'm growing," because flowers grow and they blossom and they have their own seasons. I feel like I've been judging myself, comparing myself to how I was before I started experiencing these health problems. So thank you.

**Nikki:** Oh wow. Thank you so much, Malaya, for bringing that in. I see the hearts in Zoom. Thank you so much for sharing, so beautiful. Thank you for bringing that in, both for being witnessed for your own sake and also for supporting everyone with your insights. How beautiful to have this insight: "Yes, I'm part of nature, just like a flower. I have my seasons, and they're different seasons, and I continue to grow through this challenge." And the sense of kindness and also, yes, what you said, this beauty, acknowledging your own beauty, your own goodness, this flowering. Yay, it's so beautiful. Thank you so much for sharing that.

**Claire:** What I really wanted to talk about was the difference between compassion and self-pity, or the relationship. Because I've had an extremely difficult life, I really truly have, but I spent a lot of it going into fits of self-pity and not accomplishing very much because I felt so sorry for Claire. Little by slowly, I've been introduced to situations where the people around me had more difficulties by far than I did. I'm not going to tell all their stories, but anyway, I'm now working for an organization that fosters independence for the disabled, and it's a marvelous experience because it's forcing me to stop looking at all my woes and look at the people whose lives are much more difficult than mine. And I am able to feel compassion for them. But this practice tonight was perfect because it's exactly what I want to keep working on. It can bring so much joy when you're trying to provide service for people who really need it and not get wrapped up in self.

**Nikki:** Yeah, exactly. It's a way of serving, and also, it's us, right? Not them versus us. Their suffering... I could be suffering anymore, things can shift and change at any moment. And we all have our seasons, as Malaya beautifully brought in. We all have our seasons, we all go through challenging periods, and every single human being will go through changes, transitions, challenges. So it's really us. So thanks, Claire. Thanks for bringing that sense of service and humility and gladness.

**Serena:** I have a question. What happened in my meditation is I had this overwhelming feeling of joy that I kind of brought in from where I was earlier. So I hardly was able to tune into your instructions because this overwhelming feeling of joy was in my being. So the best I was able to do was to just be with it and be with the thoughts that were associated with it. So I'm just kind of wondering in terms of practice whether that was skillful or not.

**Nikki:** Yeah, thank you for bringing that in and asking that. What I'm hearing is that there was a sense of overwhelming joy, and what you were doing is to be with it, to witness it, to hold it. And I also heard that maybe a lot of thinking was coming up. If I heard you correctly, the way to be with it is not to get taken away and go on a journey of thinking, but to stay with the joy. Stay with the joy, but not with the thinking. So what I would suggest is drop the story of the joy and the happiness and this and that, which might be looking forward to something or reminiscing about something. Drop all that and stay with the physicality, the sense of joy in your heart. How does it feel in the body, in the mind? And be kind. As long as you're being kind to whatever arises during your meditation, you're doing it right. So if joy arises, be with it with kindness. If something painful arises, be with it with kindness. If just the breath arises, be with it with kindness. So that's what I would suggest. That's the way to be with it. Does that help?

**Serena:** Thank you so much.

**Nikki:** You are very welcome. Thank you. So thank you all. Thank you for your practice, for your wholeheartedness, for your cultivation. This is such beautiful cultivation we're doing together for the sake of ourselves and all beings everywhere. So thank you. May you be well, may you be happy, may you have joy, may you have ease. And realize every single one of you, one of us, is a flower, appreciating what Malaya brought in. Every single one of us is a beautiful flower, and we have our own unique fragrance that we share with the world. And we also have our seasons. We all have our seasons, so appreciate that. Be well. May all beings be well, may all beings be happy. Thanks, everyone.

[^1]: **Ohlone land:** The speaker is acknowledging that they are on the traditional territory of the Ohlone people, the indigenous people of the coast of Northern California. The original transcript said "sit at all only land," which is a likely transcription error.
[^2]: **Sangha:** A Pali and Sanskrit word for "association," "assembly," "company" or "community." In Buddhism, it most commonly refers to the monastic community of monks and nuns, but can also refer to the wider community of all Buddhist practitioners.
[^3]: **Metta:** A Pali word often translated as loving-kindness, friendliness, or goodwill. It is the first of the four sublime states (Brahmaviharas) and is a universal, unselfish, and all-embracing love.
[^4]: **Karuna:** The Pali word for compassion. It is the desire to remove harm and suffering from others. In the context of the talk, it is described as what arises when `metta` (loving-kindness) meets suffering.